[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of conversations with tom i am here with
the legendary thinker and best-selling
author gabor mate gabor thank you so
much for joining me today it's a great
pleasure thanks for having me man i'm
really excited about this you've got
such a cool breadth of work that focuses
in on an area that i care deeply about
which is
i'll sum up in a way that i don't know
if you'll agree with but um when i look
at your work it seems to all slot into
how we develop and how we become who we
are and that is an area of deep
fascination for me
and especially with your
lens of looking at things through
childhood trauma
having worked so much in addiction um it
i think you have a really unique
understanding of sort of how we're put
together and i would love to start with
something that you begin a lot of your
um
your in-person sessions with which is
the song by johnny cash in your mind
which i had never heard so i had to i
went and listened to it and i loved it
what is it about that song
that's going to teach us about who we
are
well
as people we always think we're looking
at a reality and our view of it sees
reality the way it is
but it's been a spiritual teaching for
eons that really
brother buddha said it the the very
first statement in the collection of his
saying the dhammapada is that
our thoughts are in the lead and so so
whatever our thoughts tell us that's the
reality that we see so essentially with
our minds we create the world
now
johnny cash and this stunk says it's all
in your mind um one foot on jacob's
ladder
which is the stairway to heaven which by
the way
wasn't originated with led zeppelin the
stereotype of heaven is actually from
the bible uh where jacob dreams that the
angels are going up to heaven
or one foot in the fire so the cash
thing is one
uh
one foot on the ladder one foot in the
fire it all goes down in your mind so
the
the kind of thoughts and beliefs that we
have
create the world that we live in
and
that's what i get from that song
now
what the song doesn't say is that before
with our minds we create the world
the world creates our minds
so this is where development comes in
that that given our early experiences we
create a view of the world
and of ourselves and of other people
that then governs how we are in the
world and how we feel about everything
but people forget those early
experiences those shaping influences and
as a result we mistake
our view of the world
for the world itself it all goes down in
your mind which is what johnny sings
what's the what's the time period of
that profound shaping window of
development is it
um just a couple years in the beginning
is it till we're 15 till the brain stops
developing at 25 like what what does
that window look like
it begins in the euros
so already the
stresses or the experiences of the
mother
shape
how the infant experiences the world
we know this so that we can talk about
it maybe later in detail if you wish but
there's lots of evidence now that the
child's brain is actually
in his development is significantly
influenced by the mother's emotional
states
so it goes back that far
what i really want to understand is the
the foundation of of that so i've heard
you talk before about in um native
societies it was always understood that
if somebody was angry you would just
keep them away from a pregnant person
because you didn't want that anger
transferring but my question is why not
what what is it about
intense emotions or negative emotions
what is it doing to the substructures of
the brain that then make that
disadvantageous as the child grows
well so
there was a study done after 9 11 um
women who
suffered post traumatic stress disorder
while they were pregnant as a result of
9 11.
a year later their offspring still had
abnormal stress hormone levels
so fundamentally what happens is that
the
brain's capacity to perceive stress
and to process it
gets impaired
so that means people are now more prone
to feel stressed when there's no real
threat
or
they may be more prone not to recognize
a threat when it is there
so our whole perception of the world and
safety and our responses to stress
the physiological apparatus for handling
stress
is affected
in already by what happens in the womb
so thinking about um
the gym for instance so you go to the
gym and you want a stressor you want a
certain level of difficulty in order to
in that case you're tearing the muscle
slightly and then as it heals it grows
back stronger
yeah is it that the brain reacts
differently to stress and that any
amount of stress is bad or is there a
certain amount that is um useful and
just were going too far
well
this is where i think the language
becomes very important
what we mean by we use the word strength
so if if you mean by stress the
challenge
life is full of challenges
which will get your adrenaline going and
so on that's a good thing
when i talk about stress
i talk about a threat that the organism
doesn't know how to respond to
and
it's too much and so that um
the uh
the person who actually coined over
stress who was a fellow hungarian
canadian hence celie uh
he's the word they were the one who
coined the word in his present usage
um
he really meant pressure on an organism
that's too much for the organism to
handle so that's what i mean by stress
i don't i don't mean the stress of a
freely chosen challenge such as going to
the gym and working your muscles hard
and and going even beyond what you could
do before i don't mean that that's not
what i mean by stress
i mean by stress
and and the
the biggest triggers for stress
according to the research are
loss of control
uncertainty lack of information and
conflict
so when you subject people to those
circumstances which in this society
happens a lot
people are stressed
often beyond their capacity to deal with
it
now that capacity is very much
programmed by what happened to us very
early in life
and where does that so it begins in
utero where is the sort of closing of
that hyper malleability phase because
where what
one thing that really drives me is the
question of okay damage has been done um
you know like in your case where you're
born two months after or excuse me two
months before the nazis invade hungary
it's like not a lot to be done about
that that is what it is so now the
question becomes can we undo it
uh
is there a window of hyper malleability
where the you could sort of reprogram
the infant
or is it
like almost like an imprinting machine
where it's like nope you had this heavy
amount of stress in utero that's
imprinted and no matter what you do in
the first three years is never going to
undo that
it is imprinted
in many ways biologically which we could
talk about
that the person is not even aware of
imprinted in how the genes are turned on
and off and printed on how their
chromosomes function imprinted how their
stressor apparatus
responds to the external environment
imprinted in their cells
imprinted in inflammation in their
bodies and so on and so on
and the earlier it happens and the more
it happens and the more temperamentally
sensitive the child
the greater the effects
having said that
it's never not reversible it's never not
approachable now
fact is people can heal
people can
rewire themselves people can
find a
equilibrium but the more happened
earlier and the earlier it happened the
more difficult that work becomes which
brings me
to my
um epitaph that i've designed for my
gravestone you know what it's going to
say
it's going to say it was a lot more work
than i had anticipated
you know
it is a fair assessment
it's ongoing work like i'm 77 it's
ongoing work
and you know um when i don't take care
of myself emotionally when i don't do my
yoga when i don't get myself into the
swimming pool or on the exercise bike
when i
take on too much in my life
it gets activated so
yes
it can be dealt with and it can be
healed and it can be
uh
regulated
but it takes consciousness it takes
awareness
given your perspective with having dealt
with a lot of people that have had
severe early traumas that have echoed
through their adult lives in the form of
addiction
what is it
if it's identifiable what is it that
makes some people able to get in there
do the work harder you know than
expected though it is and other people
that get stuck
yeah
well that's the important question um
first of all let me just say that trauma
shows up in multiple ways addiction is
only one
so-called mental illnesses depression
anxiety adhd ptsd whatever others
physical illnesses chronic physical
analysts like cancer and autoimmune
disease
very often reflect trauma and in
physiological ways which we can talk
about and i'm not just giving you a
personal opinion i'm telling you what
the research shows so trauma has
multiple manifestations
of which addiction is only one now what
makes the difference
uh i don't think there's one single
factor but there are a number
uh first of all
has there been anybody along the way
that was empathetic and supportive to
you
if there was that can make it no matter
what happened that could make a huge
difference
earlier in your life the better
but if there was a teacher if there was
a f uh
uncle an aunt
anybody who maybe couldn't change your
situation but could
listen to you
or just validate you or speak to you
empathetically
that can make a difference
social class
has a lot to do with it because
if you can afford to see a therapist and
talk to somebody
that puts you in an advantage
how much stress you continue to be under
in your life
that has a lot to do with it when people
are trying to just to survive
it's hard for them to consider
transformation
so people don't under economic pressure
or racially oppressed or or um
under
economic threat
political conflict
these make it difficult for people
because people are just in survival mode
uh
people that are highly sensitive they're
both in an advantage at a disadvantage
they're at a disadvantage in that
the more sensitive they are
the more it hurts when stuff happens
but also the more sensitive they are the
more likely they might have to have some
insight or awareness or some creative
outlet so that can work both ways
i would say the biggest difference is
was there some empathetic
support in your life at any time and
even if you talk to people who've been
addiction
for a long time and say well what made
the difference
somebody talked to me like a human being
somebody didn't judge me they accepted
me
what what window does that open up for
them
is it uh it begins to allow themselves
to stop judging themselves and to
develop self-awareness or is there
something else at play nice it's the
very first thing you said um
anybody who's traumatized and
by trauma i mean a broad range of
experiences from
abuse
extreme things on one hand to
just parents who are too stressed to pay
attention to you or to really see you
and receive you
when children are not seen for who they
are or when you're hurt
they can make two assumptions
one
there's something wrong with the world
and my parents are not capable
or they don't love me
or can make the or they can make the
assumption and that's why this is
happening
because i deserve to be loved and i
deserve to be
treated well but these people are
incapable and they don't care
you can make that assumption you can
make the assumption i'm talking about
unconscious assumption
or you can make the assumption there's
something wrong with me
those are the two choices
now it's much safer for the child to
assume that there's something wrong with
them
otherwise it's safer it's a lot safer
yeah
why safer why is it safer
because what what's it like to live with
the danger
as a four-year-old living in a world
where your parents
are dysfunctional and they are uh
perhaps hateful towards you how could
you endure that for one minute
so you have to make the other opposite
assumption if this stuff is happening to
me it's because i deserve it
something wrong with me now go back to
your question
somebody comes along and and treats you
compassionately
oh
maybe i'm not that bad person
here's a person who's here's somebody
who's treating me like i was a
worthwhile human being
maybe i'm a worthwhile human being
so that compassion that
reflection that you get from this other
human being
subverts your image of yourself as
worthless
and that's what makes a big difference
whoo so that points to something that is
really
interesting maybe a little bit scary um
so lisa feldman barrett who you may or
may not know
uh has really interesting thoughts so
i'm always trying to figure out how much
of who we are as nature how much of us
is nurture and she told me tom look
you're you're asking the wrong question
so the reality is we have a nature that
requires nurture
and as you
talk about this it
and i'm i'm going to put words in your
mouth tell me if they're accurate it
sounds like you're saying our minds are
essentially co-created
and we are presenting ourselves and
looking for an echo back
of or a reflection back of what people
think about what they see and we're
using
both of those things our own sort of
sense of who we are plus what's being
reflected back to us to figure out who
we are so if something negative is
reflected back that's actually going to
shape my sense of self and if something
positive is reflected back that's going
to shape my sense of self
now
that to me begs a question i'm so
curious to know what you think about
this so my response to that is cool i'm
going to become totally self-sufficient
i'm going to get to the point where i
don't need somebody's reflection back
but i can feel the danger in that
it seems like a risky game to say i'm
going to totally withdraw i'm going to
do all the work internally i'm going to
make sure that i know who i am that i
don't need that reflection back
but knowing how
important loving relationships are and
things like that i can feel while there
would be some upside to totally knowing
who you are believing in yourself but
you're also walling yourself off
how do you
conceptualize handling that
well
it's a question who's doing it and why
because you can do that walling off in
two ways so the buddha
you know the story
he goes through all these teachers and
he wants to get enlightened then he goes
through all these very rigorous
self-denying
aesthetic
practices and he just doesn't
the truth doesn't come to him
and finally he goes off by himself and
he sits under a tree
by himself
and he just sits there and he meditates
and he contemplates everything that
arises in his mind
and then after a while
he has his nirvana he has this um
enlightenment experience
and then he's got a decision to make he
understands his own nature
he understands the nature of reality and
he really does
he's one of the
outstanding minds in history
but then he's got a decision to make so
do i just
revel in this
spiritual
liberation that i have
worked so hard to attain
and no he decides he's going to go back
and teach other people because he wants
to be connected to humanity
he wants to enlighten other people as
well
what can you articulate what his um sort
of breakthrough enlightenment
realization was
well um
[Music]
it'd be presumptuous of me to do so
because i've not had that realization
myself i've only read about it or i've
seen other people talk about it
i don't mind a regurgitation of what
other people have said i actually so i
know buddhism at a 30 000 foot view so i
actually don't know other than life is
suffering um
i don't know what sort of the key
revelations are yeah life is suffering
is
i mean his real teaching is that life
doesn't need to be suffering
but the way we set it up with our minds
it is suffering
so it really has to do with
it goes back to the johnny kashan it all
goes on in your mind you disidentify
from your mind
and reality is much greater and much
deeper
and much more sacred than your mind will
ever tell you
that's interesting can you say that
another way even even
i don't know if if
this is your own understanding of life
or um a reflection of buddhism but i'm
curious to know
if life is more profound than your mind
what are the elements that make it
profound is it beauty is it love is it
what is it
the problem with the conversation tone
is that there's two minds talking about
the nature of reality and uh in that we
don't use the same words or no no no
it's that we're still in the mind
whereas
um my
very
modest understanding of the spiritual
teachings not just buddhist spiritual
teaching but sufi teachings or
jewish spiritual teaching christian
spiritual teaching i'm talking about the
spiritual teachings not the religion
is that
there is essence there's truth
that goes beyond what the mind itself
can
comprehend
so far we must have access to it in some
way even if only through pure experience
otherwise
but that's the whole point of this pure
pure experience
that
a great poet like rumi can write about
or hafiz can write about
but
um
i cannot claim to have had that pure
experience so if i did i didn't
recognize it as such
can i give you one of the experiences
i've heard you talk about and i'll be
curious to know if if you were grazing
along the edges uh of something i
believe it was your first experience
with ayahuasca you said that
you were there and
suddenly had this rush of just pure love
and that you if i remember right you
started crying and and you were just
overwhelmed with the sense of just just
love in its purest form and
in in that moment realize you had closed
yourself off to that experience is when
i think about people talking about there
being something more profound
those are the only sort of moments that
i can relate to where i think that
feeling is so
elevated
and wonderful that but that's the only
thing i've ever touched on in my own
life where um
that seems like what they could talk
about uh does that is that getting close
well it's it's heading in the right
direction um
i think that real spiritual teachers
would say
that that what i experienced there
wasn't a feeling
it was the feelings are like
activities of our nervous systems
and they would say there's something
deeper than the nervous system
so what i experienced was a state
of of being
manifesting in love no matter love might
not be the only manifestation of it
might be courage clarity um compassion
um
justice
strength
will
i know one spiritual theory specifically
talks about it in those terms but these
are not feelings
the feeling of love and the state of
love are not necessarily the same thing
but
yeah there's more to it than just the
mental experience
there's the direct the the mental
thought um or even the emotional
resonance it's it's
more like a direct experience of
something and um
you know it's clear that what the buddha
had was for one he wasn't the only one
was a direct experience
but
to go back to your question about
isolation so there's a way of isolating
yourself
as a way of committing yourself to re
enlightenment
which means that you'll stay away from
other people for the rest of your life
it just means that you're going to go
deep into yourself and not be
distracted by
all that the world throws at you then
there's another way to isolate yourself
which is a defensive one which is the
world is so awful and heck with them all
i don't need anybody
that will protect you from
some kinds of hurt
because if you withdraw from
relationships you'll never be betrayed
but that's true
on the other hand
that itself is a state of pain that
isolation itself is a state of pain so
when you talk about isolation it depends
who's doing it and where is it coming
from and and to go back to the original
question
and you mentioned um
nurture nature it's perfectly true
that
we're born with certain expectations for
the world
i mean every creature is like
our lungs
are an expectation for oxygen
if it wasn't for oxygen we wouldn't have
lungs
so we evolved in response to the
availability of oxygen
otherwise we would not have evolved the
way we did
there might be some kind of creatures
around it wouldn't be us
so our lungs are an expectation for for
for oxygen
in the same way
our nervous systems are an expectation
for love
for nurturing
for being held
for being valued
for being enjoyed
that's what the infant is born with
those expectations
and whether we develop well or whether
we don't depends very much on how fully
those
expectations are met now we can survive
without them
my god many of us have
but survival and fully being alive and
fully living are not the same thing and
fully and survival
adapting to things
i mean
you can adapt
human beings are particularly good at
adapting to
a vast range of environments
but that doesn't mean that we thrive in
all those environments
so
one of my arguments
one of my points about the culture that
we're living in now is that yeah we're
surviving but we're hardly thriving
and we're not thriving precisely because
our expectations i'm talking about our
built-in natural expectations
i'm not talking about
artificial expectations like expect to
be
wealthy or expect to be
respected by everybody or i expect to be
achieving this achieving that
no i'm talking about the natural
expectations of a human being
and the less those expectations are met
by the rearing environment in early
years the more distorted we become
because the more we have to adapt to
something less than what we need and in
my view as i'm sure you're well aware
much much of disease physical
mental afflictions addictions and so on
they all arise out of
the ways we had to adapt to unnatural
circumstances where our
natural built-in expectations were
thwarted
that's a really um
useful way to look at things i like that
a lot so
i use different words to kind of
describe something
maybe similar if not identical which i
call the physics of being human so there
are just some things we have
needs we have
compulsions we for instance there there
is going to be a voice in your head
talking to you there is i've never met
anybody that doesn't have a negative
voice in their head talking to them
and
we have we're an active species right
but we're an active species that also
tries to conserve calories so you get
this weird sort of conflict and that
insight that you just gave i find really
[Music]
powerful when i think about early
development so this notion that our
brain comes with
i like to think of it in a biological
way though i'm sure what i'm about to
describe will be inaccurate but that
there are essentially neurons in the
brain that are looking for that love the
validation being enjoyed there was
something about the way you said that
that really hit me um and that our brain
is going to it comes like lungs
expecting the air it comes expecting
that love that validation that enjoyment
and getting all of that reflected back
and you talk a lot about a child being
narcissistic and so that's part of the
physics of being human it just is
everyone is and not in a negative way
just it's all about me that's where
their brain is at in their development
and if we sort of run the experiment of
saying
well that's probably the most
advantageous thing at least from a
historical context that you so got that
it was so prevalent that to think
erroneously to think that a parent's
happiness means that you're good
is such a great way to establish
confidence and a sense of worth and you
know all these things that are going to
propel you forward
gabriel you're really making me put
things together that i've i've never
have been able to draw the lines between
um
that is amazing i bet you say that to
all the guys
yeah uh i say it to all the good ones
how about that
um
but it's interesting especially when you
put it in context of your upcoming book
which of course i have not read called
the myth of normal and how sort of
broken our society is i've always
approached it from the the like hey
th this society is
is like any society in time where
you can
have a path through it that is
pathological or like the buddha you can
find a path that is beautiful and
profound
and
you take i think a more aggressive
approach of saying no no there's
something uniquely disruptive
about the era that we're living through
and sort of just walking through what
you were saying about the
the ex the brain has expectations of
love the way that lungs have
expectations of air and there's
something about the way that we have
structured society that is breaking that
and in breaking that we're just
regulating the immune system and a whole
host of other things that is really
interesting
walk me through then some of the
specifics that you've covered in
shattered and in some of your articles
and talks
how
is modern society dysregulating us
and what can we do to resolve some of
that
well first of all it's very interesting
uh you said shadow i don't even look
called shadow it's called sorry sorry
scattered scat i don't know but what's
interesting is how many people make say
it that way
that's interesting
that's very
what have i just revealed yeah well yeah
and to me it's always revealing
something about the person and their
self-image
you know because i don't think anybody's
ever shadowed
um scattered has to do with
the scattered mind the american the
canadian title of scattered minds it had
to do with adhd and
you know the the dispersal of attention
um
gosh you say so many things that i want
to engage with uh tom let me let me jump
back to what you said about everybody's
got this negative voice in their heads
yeah
yeah but that's not a given
it's just what happens in this society
it doesn't think there are societies
where
that would not be present or at least
not ever present
i think
we haven't had society like that for a
long long long time
but
that has to do with what civilization
does to human beings
so i'm sure that voice has been there
since the beginning of civilization
but not necessarily in our aboriginal
state that's hunter-gatherer
uh small band people now we might have a
conscience
that keeps us in line
but that's not the same as a voice that
keeps telling you how bad you are how
worthless you are
i think that's particularly is uh
that itself is a product of life
experience
what what exactly if you have a sense
causes that like what in civilization
leads to that
kids not being valued and enjoyed and
played a bit for just who they are
kids having to live up to expectations
in order to meet the
approval and welcoming of their parents
well if that's the case they better
install a little voice in their heads
that'll keep them in line otherwise they
won't get loved
and there's not a conscious process
nobody doesn't say oh i'm going to
instill a little voice in my head it's
not tight it's
this this is a natural adaptation to an
unnatural situation
in this society and i'm not blaming
plans
in this society it's extraordinarily
difficult
for parents
to give those conditions
of
what the american psychotherapist called
rogers called unconditional positive
regard
a regard that has no conditions of worth
attached to it
i accept you just for who you are the
way you are
that's very difficult for parents to
deliver even with the best of good will
but they never had it themselves not
only that then there's so much stress so
you mentioned my book scattered which is
an adhd and
i was diagnosed with it you know in my
50s
and i never bought into the idea that it
was a genetic disease and even less do i
buy into it now
but to tuning out that scattered minds
that i wrote about that itself is a
coping mechanism
so when there's when an infant is under
stress because the parents are stressed
as i was as a jewish infant
under the nazis
uh there's a lot of stress as you can
imagine
for a whole year of my first year of
life and more than that
of course i tuned out
as a way of escaping from the unbearable
stress that my mother was under
because as an infant you just soak in
the stress of your parents
but this is happening when my brain was
developing
so that gets programmed into my brain as
an adaptation now
you don't need world war and you don't
need genocide to make an infant stressed
you just need parents who are under
economic stress who got relationship
issues who got unresolved childhood
trauma
who are isolated themselves
who are struggling in their lives who
have depression or anxiety in their
lives
and infants young children
pick up on that they make it about
themselves it's too much for them
some of them will tune out to to deal
with that
the tuning out becomes programmed into
their brain because that's when the
brain develops under the impact of the
environment
and then five years later or 10 years
later or in my case 55 years later
they're diagnosed with the so-called
inherited disease
which it wasn't it was an adaptation
and it began as an adaptation it becomes
a source of a disorder but that's my
whole point that these early adaptations
have their function
but then
they're only meant to be temporary but
since they become wired in
now they create problems later on
and that i think is a source of much of
illness in our society
let me ask what would be a worse or what
would be a better scenario depending on
how you want to answer it
would you rather somebody be
loved
validated enjoyed
held touched
up until the age of three but then after
that they're put into foster care with
all of the woes of foster care
or would you rather somebody
have a very disregulated initial three
years
mother is giving the child up for
adoption which basically tells you that
the pregnancy was incredibly stressed um
gives the child away it spends the first
three years in
let's say an orphanage but then gets
adopted to a truly loving family that
wants them enjoys them validates them
hugs them and gives them all those
things which of those is
the more distressing circumstance
well i mean
i i find that a confluent one because
what you're setting up is um
two tragedies
and you asked me to choose the least
tragic
and um
i don't know that i know how to do that
i do know i think my bias would be
that if the child had everything for the
first three years
they'll probably have some inner
resilience to handle what happens later
although it would still be a terrible
scenario that you outlined
that total dysregulation in the first
three years i think would be very hard
to overcome
um
not impossible
but
you know
it's
when you think about it the scenario of
somebody
getting all that
in the first three years
and then ending up in a horrible
situation
totally unlikely i mean why why would
that even happen you know
yeah but
i can give you scenarios but but if your
question is designed to
um
look at the heart of
what is the most important developmental
period
for sure it's the first three years
from conception till the end of the
first three years not that it's over
then
but those that's the template
that's a template and if our society
just understood that
just give the kids three good years
and and and do everything you can
do everything you can as a society as a
community to support parents giving
those kids those first three years
whatever that takes
we would save so much disease so much
dysfunction so much crime
so much addiction
so much political conflict for that
matter
so
that's the importance of that question
is if we only
my friend the uh
children's troubadour rafi i mean you
probably remember rafi
he created something called the child
honoring society you know child honoring
project
and he just says well if this society
honored children what would it look like
well guess what we'd pay attention to
the environment
we would um
make sure that parents have the right
support
that children are treated well
that parents who need the help
get it
so that they don't traumatize their
children
so that schools um
instead of focused on
turning with gears and and machines in
the form of human beings
focused on promoting healthy self-image
and selfie self development and healthy
brain development
what if that was the focus of the
schools
it wouldn't take it wouldn't be more
expensive than what we're doing now it'd
be less expensive
so
yeah those first three years are crucial
there's a guy named jeffrey canada who
introduced me to a concept that i found
both intriguing and terrifying which
goes along it was why i was asking that
question and he was looking at kids that
grow up in the inner cities and why they
end up doing poorly the rest of their
lives and kids who grow up in
middle income families and why they end
up doing better and he said that he
believed it could be boiled down to the
number of words a child hears by the age
of three and the ratio of positive to
negative and i thought oh my god is it
really that simple
and he was basically saying that
you're it's it comes down to the
language centers of the brain developing
and if
in that period where those those parts
of the brain are actually being
constructed
if you
know that the construction is going to
be based on the environment and you give
it a paltry environment where there's
very little language to interact with
then you get an underdeveloped language
center of the brain which ends up
holding them back later where
communication becomes extraordinarily
important in today's environment yes and
i just thought
one that's thrilling news because
anybody that encounters that information
when they're pregnant or about to become
pregnant can do something with it and it
will have lifelong positive impact but
it's terrifying to think that you catch
a kid at age six and it's like
you can do the work and for sure like
you were saying you can always like
there can be improvement and i would
never want people to hear that and just
give up
but whoa the road becomes a lot harder
to hoe
well
i have to say i don't agree with you
what was the man's name
jeffrey canada
okay well
good name i don't agree with um
i mean it's not that i disagree with
what he's saying
but i think there's there's a deeper
layer there give it to me because what
develops first
see the language is the left side of the
brain okay
and what actually develops first if you
look at it
is the right side of the brain
which holds the
unconscious and it's that right-sided
unconscious template
that's most important then there's lots
of people there with beautiful language
development
particularly they're called professors
and academics who are emotionally
infants
[Music]
and sometimes the left the language
centers on the left side of the brain
can become a refuge from the lack of
emotional grounding in the right side of
the brain
so no what actually matters is how those
infants are held
how they're sung to
how they're played with
but the great neuroscientist
unfortunately died untimely
a couple of years ago
yeah step his name was and he
distinguished a number of brain systems
that we share with other
animals
they include seeking so the exploration
of the environment they include lust
obviously which is sexuality
necessarily
rage
which is
healthy anger to protect your boundaries
um
caring so that be care for infants and
others
these are brain systems
and uh what he calls grief and panic
which is what happens when we lose our
attachment relationships so that there
should be grief there should be panic
those are healthy
when our
attachment and there's also play
and all animals play
and infants start playing peekaboo at
two months long before they have
language
and play is much more important for the
development of the brain than languages
according to a whole lot of
developmentals and so
so
because it sets the um
your sense of yourself in the world
and
so it's not that what
this man canada says about language
isn't important
it's just that
first there has to be this
right brain emotionally grounded
template for all that
and even later on
it's not the language skills we have to
help people develop not that we don't we
do
but we have to work on their sense of
themselves and and and essentially
rewire the
right-sided unconscious brain
so in la there's a very famous
psychotherapist psychologist called
alan shore
who's now working on what he calls
right-sided
psychotherapy or right brain
psychotherapy
with adults
who've got all kinds of language skills
but who don't have properly developed
unconscious
because of what happened to them early
on in life
let me quickly read you a list um
there's a wonderful um
psychologist at notre dame called darcia
narvaez who by the way you might want to
talk to sometime
and
she studied hunter-gatherer societies
which is how we evolved
that was a revolutionary niche and for
millions of years and for hundreds of
thousands of years
and even for until 15 000 years ago
everybody lived in our society so that's
where we evolved
and he says what do these people provide
to their infants
and she lists them soothing perinatal
experience
prompt responsiveness to the invention
to the needs of the infant none of this
business about letting kids cry it out
those kids are picked up as soon as they
whimper in fact they never even put down
extensive touch and constant physical
presence including touch with movement
so the parents always walking around
holding their kids the proposed on the
back of the parent
frequent infant initiated breastfeeding
up for up to two to five years whoa with
the average weaning age at age four
now here in america here in north
america we're lucky if women are able to
breastfeed their kids for two months
and about 25 of american women have to
go back to work after two weeks
but that's an insult to the infant
i'm not blaming the women
it's the economy it's the society
a community of multiple warm responsive
adult caregivers so the whole tribe is
there to hold you and to enjoy you
um creative free play in nature with
multi-age playmates now how many kids in
our society get anything close to any of
that
then we wonder why do kids have so many
mental health issues and behavior
problems and so on
and then we then we focus on the
behavior problems and we try and correct
the behaviors
instead of looking at well what is this
child
manifesting through that behavior
you know
so
i think
we need a lot we need to look a lot more
at not the cognitive developmental stuff
but at the emotional developmental
side of things
so
that granted
what your friend says about language is
very important
that not being granted
we're barking up the wrong tree
what so i
i think a lot about what my north star
is what i want in my own life what sort
of my ideal life looks like and then
when i'm working with other people and
trying to help them i think about you
know what what is the north star that
somebody's really in trouble i would
advise hey adopt this as your north star
do you
have something like that that you think
that people ought to
strive for for their own sake
the reason i
smirk when you ask that question is
because
it puts me in a position as some kind of
expert
whereas
believe me
every day
i still work at figuring myself out and
finding my direction and
or or refining my direction and so on so
it's not like i can say here's this
pearl of wisdom take it and run with it
then this will you know it's not like
that for me
um
well look let me turn the question on
just for a moment and and as a way for
me to think about your question sure um
so
like i don't know a lot about you you
know but
what i do understand is that
in significant ways
you've made a tremendous success in your
life
a lot of
you know achieve things that a lot of
people look at my god if i only had that
i'd be okay
but let me just ask you this i'm just
absolutely curious
having achieved all that in the material
world
did you come to
saying to yourself oh i'm okay now
the quest is over
definitely not so what so so what were
you looking for
so my north star
in the beginning was wealth
and that was i showed up every day
trying to get rich
and at about eight years into that i was
absolutely devastated
spiritually is probably the right way to
think about it i just felt dead inside
and i at that point i was worth about 2
million on paper so my actual life was
not
the life of a wealthy person but um i
had equity in the company and i went to
my wife and i said hey i know that i
promised i would make you rich one day
i'm gonna need to take a step back for a
minute because i am profoundly unhappy
and she was like hey what i want for is
your happiness and so do whatever you
need to and so we were going to
um move to a tiny village in greece and
i was going to go back to writing which
was my first love okay and just do
things that made me feel alive
long story short um my then business
partners said hey don't leave
we actually feel the same way so why
don't we build something that would give
us
what we're looking for and so if i had
to shorthand what i came to realize i'm
looking for which is very much my north
star
is fulfillment and i'll define
fulfillment as
working really hard
to build a set of skills that i care
about
that serve not only me but other people
and
in doing that
i am addressing what i think are the
physics of being a human now i may be
misunderstanding that it is the physics
only of humans in this era i'm very open
to this is within the context of the
civilization that i grew up in here are
the things that seem to come
pre-built into our hardwiring um and and
maybe not
um historically accurate but
given the world that i live in um
doing something working really hard is a
big part of um i feel
there's just a subroutine in my brain
that wants me to earn things
and when i do that i feel good when i
work hard in the gym i feel good when i
take a cold shower i feel good when i
um you know do something difficult for
my wife i feel good about that
and
i definitely enjoy that loop
and then
well let me let me work okay yeah please
so
if i could find one word to summarize
what you
what i think i heard you say
it's meaning
definitely yeah so so that that's one of
those human expectations is meaning i
think
that's a need okay now how you find that
is every individual thing
but let me ask you a very scary question
though because it
it puzzles me um
[Music]
you identify meaning with hard work
well
i've seen this happen by the way not god
dwelling it won't but
what if you had a
stroke tomorrow
or
[Music]
some idiot plowed into you and you were
bicycling and and and you became
quadriplegic no you couldn't work hard
anymore
then i love that question
i obsess about things like that so i've
thought a lot about that one in
particular
um so i would give myself 30 days to
mourn whether i should or shouldn't uh i
would and i would be very i would allow
myself to wallow in the sense that it
was unfair and that now i have to change
the things that i engage in that bring
me joy but then at the end of that it
it is what it is and so getting lost in
unfairness is not going to serve me so
then i would immediately turn my
attention
to
finding a way to have meaning and
purpose i think that that
nothing that i've ever experienced in
life leads me to believe that i would
ever feel fulfilled without meaning and
purpose
okay great so finding a way to tap into
that and then i have a sort of safety
valve which is my wife and i remind each
other of this all the time because we've
already had all the financial success at
this point to do something for the sake
of money would be so crazy
so
we definitely don't do that and what we
remind each other of is you should love
your life like just from a joy
perspective and if you don't check in
with
is this joyful because
if you're working hard and it's joyful
that makes sense to me
if you're working hard and it's
deteriorating
your joy your sense of self whatever
then that's just madness so
for even for our employees what we say
is look you're an adult i want you to
control when you need a day off so you
have an unlimited vacation policy use it
as you see fit um i do want people that
are hard workers don't get me wrong but
i know there are some times where on a
tuesday i'm just like i'm i'm burning
out like this isn't fun and so
i stop immediately because
i know what my priorities are in life
and
joy is
extraordinarily high and it is certainly
higher than success
okay
well that's great um
that makes it easier for me to answer
your question um
in terms of my new start um
joy is something that
um
for me is an ongoing project you know
and i really do think that goes back to
the lack of play that i received in the
first year or two of my life you know
under conditions of wartime and genocide
there's just a lot of cheerful play that
happens with the baby
um
but what really lights my fire is truth
i just want to know the truth whatever
that is
because you like knowing how the world
works
there's no because
you see it
truth is its own value
i don't
i mean i can give you all kinds of good
reasons why truth is a good thing
but
ultimately
uh
it's just
a value in itself for its own sake
and so i'm passionate about truth um
both internal truth and external truth
and i'm passionate
but my work is to as much as
i can perceive truth and as much as i
can communicate my perceptions
that other people have access to truth
as well or that they or that their own
passion in truth is kindled
uh in its own right so that's
that's my
if you ask for a notestar that's what i
would say for myself
that's really interesting not at all
what i thought you were going to say can
i interpret when i look at the books
you've written and i look at you know
your willingness to come and do a
podcast like this can i read that all as
an exploration of truth or are these
sort of side tangents no
purely that's what it's about it just so
happens that as a medical doctor
somebody dealt with depression and adhd
and myself
dealt with terminal illness and
palliative care dealt with addictions
deal with babies
um
[Music]
my path to truth has been through
my own experience and through my medical
experiment my personal experience
what i've been through as a person what
i'm going through as a person
and what i saw experienced and learned
as a physician so
the books express all that
when it comes to physical illness or
addictions or
child development or whatever
but
the lodestar
is always the truth
and from that point of view
i never cared much who agrees with me
and who doesn't and
to what extent my colleagues
value or don't value it you know that's
just
as i say it folks you know and uh
um
in this society and this is not a
personal lament it's just a general
comment that
truth is not hard to come by not easy to
come by because
for all the
knowledge that's out there and for all
the expertise
um it's also split and it's also
disintegrated
so people have a hard time seeing the
overall reality of things
and so
my attempt always is to
look at the context and look at the
overall reality so not just
how do you how do you change a kid's
behavior
but
why is the kid be having that behaving
that way and what is it in the
environment that the kid is reacting to
or somebody's addicted
not just why are they using a substance
or why they are obsessive pornography or
gambling
but
what is that doing for them what is that
giving them that they need what peace of
mind what temporary relief
what
numbing numbing of painful emotions
and
where did those painful emotions come
from and what happened to them what's
the context in which it happened so that
everything leads back to everything else
and so i'm always looking for the larger
truth of things which
demands a broader look
not isolating everything but looking at
everything as as one which
scientifically and spiritually and
materially it is
i am obsessed with what is true so i
resonate with you there big time what i
don't understand so i'm going to ask you
a follow-up question to see if i can
isolate um what it is about the
the nature of truth just in and of
itself that is meaningful to you so
um i'm interested in the truth for one
reason and one reason only if i'm really
honest with myself and that is it has so
much utility
once you understand it's like it's like
physics to me because we understand
physics we can send things to the moon
we can create satellites you know better
manufacturing whatever um
would
the truth
be as meaningful to you
if you were trapped on a desert island
with access to all the information in
the world but you could never engage
with another human
so you could assimilate the truth you
could learn what it is synthesize it
maybe even have insights that other
people are missing and and know to the
core of your being that you
have
uncovered something that is true would
that be meaningful or is part of what
makes it matter to you that you can put
it back out into the world and that
ultimately somebody can use it
well so first of all
let's not
confuse truth with
oh interesting
so help me understand what i'm missing
well there's lots of facts out there
but
truth is much larger than facts it's
it's integrating the facts
in a in a in a picture of of reality
so that and i'm
maybe putting very clumsy language on
what may be a far more beautiful
sentiment
so when when i hear you say that and i
take it in totality of how all these
things come together
i come back to this idea of
the truth is that is the way the world
works so don't ask about the
the addiction ask about what caused the
pain like that makes sense to me because
now you can actually address it and heal
but what makes that capital t truth
interesting is the healing for me
but it's like
why do you want people to heal
um because of my north star so my north
star which seems self-evident to me and
i'm always surprised that it is in
everybody's north star
is that there is
uh the only thing that matters to me in
the way that i view the world is your
neurochemical state
and your
neurochemistry
the only thing that's resilient because
joy comes and goes suffering comes and
goes hopefully
and
the only thing that gives you the
resilience to even in the middle of a
painful moment of storm to have
emotional equilibrium is what i call
fulfillment so again
meaning and purpose derived from working
hard for something
um
that you have developed a unique set of
skills so you really matter in that
situation and it it isn't only
alleviating your suffering it's helping
other people
and
that to me feels so inherent to the
human animal
that
as a social species we're just never
going to be able to escape
getting
psychologically punished for failing to
help others and we're never going to
escape getting rewarded for helping
others and i think that the more
uniquely we can do that so in a way that
matters to me right so you're not still
a high school teacher you're
you're expressing
helping others in in a very unique way
that i mean literally i've never come
across anybody that's got the unique
um
conflagration of things that you have
so
that makes your contributions all the
more individual and therefore i would
imagine precious to you so anyway
because of my north star i want to
alleviate that pain by having worked
hard to offer something to somebody that
they go whoa like this alleviated my
pain and now i can also go do something
that helps other people um
that's why the healing matters okay so
look so then to go back to your desert
island question
the buddha put himself in a desert
island you know i mean metaphorically
speaking
isolated in the forest didn't see
anybody you know
he
no i'm not talking with me i'm talking
about him the way i understand that
historical figure
he would have been perfectly okay being
on his own
because he attained
a sense of reality that was complete
and then he made a decision
out of compassion
to come back and teach others
and
you are talking about compassion as well
you're talking about
not truth is utility you're talking
about truth as compassion
so
it's not just useful because you can
build things with it
the way you defined it
is
you want the truth so you can alleviate
the suffering of others
and
that's part of the truth
like jesus said you know he is another
great
spiritual avatar and teacher he says you
will know the truth and the truth will
liberate you
he didn't say the truth will liberate
you he said you will know the truth and
it will liberate you so when you know
the truth that's where freedom is
so truth goes way beyond facts
truth ultimately
as i understand that then as i've been
taught
has to do with
liberation and freedom
and it has to do with compassion
in exactly the way you talked about it
as well
so when you say
telling what truth is well i'm telling
you
it's got all these aspects
and it goes back to our conversation
about meaning
so that life without truth is not a
meaningful life
that is uh that's very interesting as
you were talking i was like oh please
god let him write a book about truth i
would uh
hearing you say all that i would
definitely sign up for that book i want
to talk about the idea of a bodhisattva
so this is one of the things that i
found
super interesting about buddhism
and again hey a guy that understands it
at 30 000 feet does not know the
specifics but
that idea of hey there's two things you
can do with enlightenment you can hey
you're enlightened and now you sort of
stand apart from everybody else or you
get enlightened and decide to be a
bodhisattva to re-engage to go back in
to help other people and
do you think
this is maybe a dangerous question but
any
buddy would like knowing what you know
about the human mind would anybody ever
that attained enlightenment actually
just go peace i'm out
it seems like the very nature of that
moment would sort of propel you back
to other people
well
first of all
the last thing i could
i want to present myself as as any kind
of an expert on
what it is i thought that might be your
response yeah you know
but yeah i mean there have been
in the christian tradition there were
saints that went to the desert and they
just stayed there
and then certainly on the other all the
hindu traditions there all these people
in the buddhist tradition as well i
think there are people who
you know sit in caves and they just
contemplate reality that's what they do
which doesn't mean that what they do has
no impact on others
but they're not going out but they're
not out there trying to recruit others
or to teach others they're just doing
what they're doing
i
have
extraordinary difficulty imagining
myself being one of those people
um
which i'm not sure is either is an
advantage for me i mean i might be
more advanced if i could handle the idea
of being on my own
and and not doing anything
and just being
and just valuing being
period
i imagine
that for a person like me might be a
step forward
but i
but yeah i think from my limited
understanding they have people there
have been people who've done that and
they're part of the human spectrum
aren't they
very well said
gabor what at this point you're 77
yeah
you're so productive what is it that
keeps you going when most people are
like counting the days until they can
retire at 64 or whatever um
what what keeps you going
uh botox steroid injection
[Laughter]
um
well look i mean
you talked about meaning uh
there's so much meaning in my life
i am i'm so fortunate
you know that that
and i've never stopped
developing not that i've arrived there
but i've never stopped developing like i
never stopped being curious
um
i believe i have
i've finally come to accept that yeah i
do have a contribution to make and and
and and uh
and that
that has value in the world and it is
value for me so
at
this point it's just
it's not keeps me going it's it's it's
like
it's just who i am at this point
you know is is i'm curious about what
i'm doing i'm excited about
much of what i do i'm excited about
having conversations like this
i'm excited about the book i'm writing
the teaching that i do
i'm excited about spending time with my
wife of 51 years now i'm excited about
that i can still go swimming and
bicycling and do the yoga and just
you know
my life is just a very blessed one at
this point not that i feel like that
every moment
but since you ask
it's not like i'm
you know what it is
when people talk about work
what is work
i i think um
if i remember right from physics
one way to look at work is energy
expended against resistance
and the more energy ex
you expend against more resistance the
harder you have to work the more
fatiguing it is
but i'm fortunate enough and i'm free
enough in my life right now
that i don't have to face resistance
internal resistance
i want to do what i'm doing and
there's just so much more and and
and i'm sure that my vision of reality
is still very limited and maybe there's
more to find out in fact i'm sure
there's more to find out so
it's just uh
it's just an expansion into old age i
think if if we're fortunate enough
we'll see how that goes and you know one
never knows what tonight will bring like
the day after tomorrow might bring but
so far
it's an expansion
not physically
because as we get older physically i
don't swim as fast as i used to
but
but there's an expansion
that's available to us mentally and
spiritually
relationally
in terms of understanding
and that's
i don't know if that's
i don't know what that sounds like but
that's what keeps me going
how how do we expand spiritually and
that's probably a word that would
warrant definition
but i'm curious how you think about that
well
so
spirituality is really beyond who we are
as bodies and as minds
so it's an awareness
that
lies underneath all that and can hold
all that but isn't identical with it
and this is the way it's hard for me to
say am i saying anything
i truly know am i just repeating what
spiritual teachers that i've respected
and have learned from
have mouth and i'm just repeating what
they told me
but it's both i think i i do have a
sense that there's more to us and that
more is
i think what we call spirituality
and it's all kinds of shapes and forms
and i'm not concerned about that
but
i do know that
i am not who i used to think i was
and that nobody is who they think they
are
um they're they're beyond that
and
that's the common teachings i think of
all spiritual traditions
which i'm very
inadequate and this is not false modesty
i'm just telling you
uh
it's i'm inadequate at translating
because
i haven't
had that deep experience
that other people have had
so it's very interesting and i believe
you that you're not just being um
falsely humble but as somebody who
um
works so much with
there's two two parts of your background
that um probably lean into what i would
consider spiritual uh but i think we may
define that slightly differently but um
one is the palliative care which i'm
extraordinarily fascinated by people
that do that
and then
your
i don't know if you would call yourself
a guide of um
of hallucinogenic transformation i'm not
sure exactly what your involvement is
with that but i know that you've
you've exploited enough to to sort of
have at least a sideways glance at
what's going on there
talk to me first about palliative care
i know that you sort of ended up there
by accident but
what makes that fascinating to me is
you've got
subtracting out the pain
you've got somebody who's there
themselves but all of a sudden their
future is a known quantity and it's very
short
and the profound
change
that that makes in the human mind i find
interesting
um what did you learn about
life about yourself
um in your time in palliative care
well
the
the people the nurses and the physicians
and the um
the social workers and and the others
who work in palliative care
tend to be a very special breed
um and not they're not afraid of death
um
so learning not to be afraid of human
death
and giving up your sense of omnipotence
are very liberating
by a sense of omnipotence i mean
physicians are trained to save lives i'm
telling you tom
i knew physicians
that would barely visit their patients
in palliative care because they couldn't
stand
what they considered to be their own
failure which of course it wasn't
but the the the their self-images
healers or
physicals
just couldn't withstand the white heath
of death
and so that's
very liberating when you just
you get to talk to somebody and you get
to minister to them and you're not
pretending to be able to do anything
more than you can do
but you can really listen to people
and get to know people in their final
days and their final hours
final weeks
it's an absolute privilege
um what what about it is a privilege
is there an interesting thing getting to
know getting to know people without
pretension
you're not pretending to do anything you
can't do
and they're past pretending
if they want to die right they pass
pretending
that's interesting what do you mean die
right
well there's ways of dying you can you
can resist it
you can resent it
you can be angry about it
or you can uh
actually accept it
and allow
so much of what may be repressed in life
to finally arise for yourself
because it because before then you were
too busy and you were too intent on your
role and your personality and
getting this done of getting that done
you know
in one of my books when the body says no
i talk about this guy
who um
who had a company
selling shark
cartilage as a treatment for cancer
that was
total shock
but he believed in it
and then he developed cancer himself
and he was admitted to the palliative
care unit and i was looking after him
and he was still eating he had terminal
cancer all over his body a week or two
left
he was still eating shark cartilage
which smelled awful you could
when you stepped off the elevator
to the palette carefully you could smell
the shark cartilage
and i finally said to them
what does that
smell i don't like the smell what does
it taste like does it taste awful i hate
it i said why are you eating it and i
said
do you think he'll help you cancer he
said no i no longer believe that
but my business partner would be so
disappointed if i stopped eating it
and so
one of the last things i was able to do
for him is to say is to actually
convince him to help him see that look
you don't have to pretend anything
anymore
it's not your job whether or not your
business part is disappointed
he had to literally
walk into the last week of his life
before he could let go
of his role
as being responsible for other people
so
that
coming towards death experience can be a
powerful teacher for people
and i've seen real love and real beauty
and real inspiration from a lot of these
people so it's beautiful work and i know
that everybody who
works in palliative care will tell you
the same thing it's a real privilege
can you share some of the beauty
well i think i just did
just people being them
allowing themselves to be touched
to be helped
um
to be honest with themselves
to share stuff that the navy never told
anybody else before in their lives
because they're too afraid to
um to accept
real lessons and acceptance
you talked earlier about how you might
use of a month to resent and so on you
know so these people are very often not
past that point
but that's a privilege to witness
knowing how resentful i can get when
life doesn't go my way you know
are there
things that um
[Music]
would it be a valuable exercise for
people to run the thought experiment of
you know look i might not make it to
tonight like you said let alone tomorrow
do you think that there is uh insight to
be had from that or is there another way
for us to access
um
getting beyond like if if you're
defining beauty as
you don't have to pretend anymore you
don't have to play a role
you can really be who you are and maybe
this dips into big t truth
um
how do we access that now without
needing to be
truly facing a terminal illness
well again i don't know that i have it's
very easy for me to speak
from my present position as a healthy
active 77 year old and i know what i
like i know what it gets like when i get
a stopped toe and how
my life is unfair you know why did i
stop my door no i can't get on my
elliptical machine you know so again i'm
in no position to give you
stage advice but i can tell you two
things one is i've talked to a young
fellow in his thirties he's written a
book called blessed with a brain tumor
his name is volpai and this guy's a
brain tumor
and i said well what's the blessing here
i interviewed him he said well for one
thing
when i'm interacting with somebody now
i value each moment
because i never know that this might be
the last time i ever speak to them
um
in the buddha
again i'm talking like something a
buddhist which i'm not but
um he had his
monks do a meditation where they had to
imagine themselves
dead in the in in the graveyard and they
had to imagine themselves
being eaten by worms
so the flesh melts off their bones
it's rotting flesh
and then at the imagine themselves as
bones just lying there disarticulated
bones and finally even the bones being
ground into dust you know and he had
them contemplate this
as a way of bringing them to present-day
reality present moment reality
no
i can't say that i've attained any of
that i mean
i'm just telling you there are practices
there about is there's a book on my
shelf
by stephen jenkinson who's another
fascinating guy it's called die wise
and he said you know it's basically
about you want to die well start
preparing it for it now
what's the wisdom if you remember from
the book
the wisdom is that i haven't read the
book yet
my son just gave it to me um
as a birthday gift a few weeks ago so
i'll read it but i haven't read it again
that's really interesting
um yeah i for me it has been a very
useful thought experiment to remind
myself that
for a long time i focused entirely on um
i want to live forever and i was um
really trying to
uh do all the things that i thought
would extend my life to say 120 years
believing that in that period of time
you know that science would get better
and we sort of hit health escape
velocity where every year that i lived
there was you know a year and a day
added to
our ability to cure illness and
that really served me for a long time
and it allowed me to make long-range
plans that other people not might not be
willing to make and
really made me feel excited and
connected and then there was something
about
probably about a year ago that i started
to have this feeling that i would be
better served and more motivated by
flipping it and to start now thinking
about how
transient
my life is and that almost certainly
since none of us know what's going to
happen
almost certainly i am going to die
and
i don't get a heaviness from that um
quite the contrary there's something
about it that i find very
motivating that i do see the beauty that
people so often talk about that you know
you have this life for such a limited
time
and to waste it playing a role to waste
it doing things that don't fill you with
joy to waste to chasing somebody else's
dream like it just doesn't make sense
and yeah that that has been fun and i i
enjoyed both sides of the coin and i got
something very beautiful out of each and
it i didn't even like consciously
make the shift i just found myself more
and more sort of getting a bigger gust
of wind of of elevating wind if you will
uh from the side of thinking man this
really is like
how lucky how transient how beautiful in
its sort of ephemeral nature how
wonderful it is
um
and i think part of that part of what
was releasing in that for me is i am
very much driven to matter
but never at the cost of joy right so i
was like i really want to matter i want
to do things that like are going to be
felt but i don't think about legacy i
don't think about living beyond myself
or doing things that need to outlive me
i just think about like hey what can i
do right now that will bring me more
fulfillment that will give me more joy
and
yeah it was very
it was very fascinating to see that
transition happen where i went from the
only thing that
gave me that push was thinking of myself
living forever and then all of a sudden
realizing no it's actually now more
advantageous to think of sort of
imminent death which trust me i'm not in
any way shape or form eager for um
but
just interesting that that change
happened i don't know if that's just
sort of a natural thing about you know
getting into my mid 40s and everybody is
going to have that sort of same
realization but no everybody will not
have the symbolization i think everybody
might
feel the
knife
pricking of that
question but not everybody would resolve
it the same way
and some people resolve it by getting
botox injections
and
[Music]
life enhancing
age supplements and
if they're if they're wealthy enough
they'll
and they'll invest in cryo technology so
that they can be frozen and then who
knows miraculously resurrected and
uh
which i think is
personally a total scientific nonsense
but um
not everybody's and some people will
just ignore it and and they'll try to
escape from it by trying to
keep their lives busy and
and and follow all kinds of compulsions
so i think the question
the pain of that question is inside
everybody but i don't think everybody
resolves resolves it the same way
and um
and i i
you know you're much more younger than i
and
you
say you have resolved it and maybe you
have
or maybe it's just something that you're
still quite comfortable telling yourself
at your young age and who knows how you
feel about it by the time you get my age
yeah i don't i don't actually wouldn't
characterize it that i've resolved it i
i am making only one statement
that right now at the age that i'm at
it's more useful it's more motivating to
realize that i'm going to die uh when i
was saying i'm not rushing towards that
i
if i actually thought it would work i
would cryogenically freeze myself like i
would much prefer to live forever um
oh yes yeah yeah that that's not even
like a a question for me and that may be
mental illness i'm perfectly willing to
accept that but in terms of what
is motivating to me that for sure like
one of my great pains and this is one it
actually bothers me so much i can't
allow myself to think about it um that i
can't pursue all the things that i'm
passionate about because there just
isn't enough time
i know that one
and that's like that's one of those far
more than stubbing my toe would make me
think life is unfair that one does and
it really messes with my head and so i i
just have to put it out of my mind yeah
but it only messes with your head
because you have a certain belief i mean
there's a
there's a belief underneath i totally
get it
i mean i think a lot of us have
experienced that i certainly have
somebody once said every choice excludes
every time you make a choice you're
excluding something else
you know and that's only true
the the question is what part of me or
you doesn't want to accept that why do
we have a problem with it
and
there's some underlying
belief there that
creates pain around it it doesn't need
to be painful
just gonna be just this reality
you know but so if it hurts or if it
bothers us
there's some belief there
i haven't thought about it but now that
you mention it
there's some belief there that creates
the the pain
it's just like why do i have to be
everything and do everything why
i am a limited
human being
i'll take a swag at it and let me know
what you think so
um part of what i do um is so my company
actually tells stories so movies tv
shows comic books that whole thing
and when we're developing a project we
need to figure out what the style of
that project let's say it's a comic book
we have to figure out the style
so you go and you start you know looking
at materials and seeing it and you
realize that there's
a hundred different ways you could go
200 different ways more
and
you'll respond so
intensely to seven of them
and it is very hard to
know that i won't get to spend a year in
that style right that i have to narrow
it down to to just one
and
it's interesting like what i always tell
entrepreneurs is
what really trips people up is you're
standing in a room with a thousand doors
and your job is to close 999 of them
right to decide comes from what the
latin to cut it's like to your point
about exclusion
that there's going back to the physics
of being human i don't know why and
maybe it's a modern society thing but
humans have a hard time
closing those doors they have a much
harder time of closing the other doors
than they have walking through one
because if i say hey you can walk
through that one you can come right back
then they'll walk through it but if i
say you have to pick one that you were
going to walk through forever that they
would just stand there paralyzed but
isn't don't we have the same dilemma
when it comes to relationships as well
you know it's interesting when i was
saying that my wife popped into my mind
and i don't with relationships i have
not struggled with that um i it was a
part of the calculus of whether or not
to marry my wife that i'll never sleep
with another woman again um but it
wasn't a hard part of the calculus so i
don't know if that's just
uh okay
okay that happens or what
fair enough and that's great and
what about before you met your wife
gabriel this is interesting and uh any
insight you have here will be greatly
welcomed
i
understood very early on the utility of
um
commitment
so
i was very bad with women when i was
young extraordinarily bad
and
my mom though gave me a piece of advice
which was mind-blowing to me and she
said for a woman
trust is required for an orgasm and i
thought what
like that seems so strange to me as a
guy i was like let me tell you that
trust does not enter into my mind when
it comes to whether or not i can have an
orgasm and but i thought oh that's
really interesting and so then sort of
looking at women how they're prized for
their beauty
and committing to somebody which always
struck me as a good idea that the value
in a shared life like
if you ever watch this interview over
again look at my face when you say
you've been married for 51 years i was
smiling year to year um because that's
something that really matters to me is
sharing a life with my wife for as long
as humanly possible and all the things
that i have to give up pale in
comparison to what it means to share a
life with somebody like that um so
putting the okay women need trust that's
interesting their prize for their beauty
which means that it's going to go away
over time as their partner wanting to
give them that love and security and and
to be seen and desired which i think is
something that people long for in a
romantic relationship
i need my wife to know that i will
always find other women attractive
because it's just hardwired in me
but
i so covet commitment and and being in a
bonded relationship with you that i want
you to know no matter what you're going
to turn into a bag of wrinkles god
willing we get to that stage you're old
i'm old we're not physically attractive
in the the typical you know cues of
beauty and fertility
but i'm still going to be into you
because we've shared a life so anyway
that
notion hit me very early
and so i've always
i haven't struggled with commitment i
guess that was a lot of words around
that and i and i have been a commitment
phobe you know
really
what was the push
well which has to do with my own
childhood history you know is that
to commit something is to invite pain
and rejection
you know which goes back to
being one year old and being
given to a stranger by my mother to save
my life and i didn't see her for six
weeks five or six weeks
so to be to open your heart
and to be committed means to be hurt
you know i'm not making excuses i'm
saying that's how it works for me i've
learned commitment so
your mother gave you beautiful advice
but i've had to learn that over time
the good news i can tell you
tom is the beauty does not go away
that that that
should your marriage
come to a 51 years
as mine has
you'd be looking to your wife's eyes and
you'll be looking this you'll be seeing
the same beauty that you saw
the first day you met her
it's going to be amazing
so it's not like that
it's not like all those wrinkles and
stuff
they don't take away the beauty that's
not where the beauty comes from
you know so that
that again is
our society's um
travesty
when it comes to defining beauty
um
so
i'm telling you i've got good news for
you
no i love that um
i know you're
uh very clear about the things you
consider yourself an expert in and what
you don't and i'm more than happy to
hear just your thoughts out loud but i'm
curious in 51 years of marriage other
than that that beauty remains
what are things that you've learned it
seems like your marriage is better now
than it was before based on things i've
heard you say before
what what advice you have for people
that are
you know much earlier in the
relationship than you
um
it's that the managers
a wonderful opportunity
to learn
about yourself and about life
if you're willing to be curious
and
and that
it's not 50 50.
it's 100 it's 100
so you're each 100 responsible for how
you show up
and
every difficulty we've ever had
has been a powerful learning experience
and this is where the commitment to
truth comes in because that's one thing
we shared
is that
it's not easy to give up
your point of view and your grievance
and your
stance
but
it's a deep payoff and when you do that
so that
the marriage is just the most wonderful
school there is
for development
if you're willing to
look at it like that and if
if you and if when you need the help if
you're going to get the help to look at
it that way
and so how do you open yourself up to
that is it soliciting feedback from
your partner about what they see and how
you are and helping you understand the
truth about yourself or is it something
totally different well there's a lot
there's certainly that that's a very
important part of it um
it's also
which goes back to a lot of my work is
that
any deep pain that you're experiencing
is you confusing the present moment for
the past
so that in a marriage you're going to
get triggered
but when you think of a trigger it's a
very small little thing
and
what's much more important is the
ammunition and the explosive
that the trigger sets off and guess what
who's carrying the ammunition explosive
you are so you can focus on the trigger
she said this or he said that they
didn't say that they didn't do that or
you can focus oh
what's exploding inside me and how long
i haven't been carrying this so it takes
that curiosity and the willingness to
look at yourself
speaking of trauma and how we're
carrying around that explosive charge
are there universals to healing from
trauma
what do you mean universals
things that apply to everybody so
i'm guessing a big part of it's going to
be self-awareness you need to become
self-aware
but
when i think about adults trying to heal
from childhood trauma that strikes me as
a very difficult road and i'm just
wondering
um
you know i i hope that it's a hopeful
road certainly from what i've
encountered with your work there is
definitely a lot of hope
and i'm just curious you know for
somebody watching this who's
who is just in the grips of
you know childhood traumas both sort of
known and unconscious
what can they do to begin to heal
so
there's many healing paths
but
my own approach can be summed up
in two words and it's also the title of
a course that i teach for therapists and
so on
um
and
there's versions of it for the lay
public as well i'm not recommending my
particular work i'm talking about the
name compassionate inquiry
so if you can be curious the inquiry
part is the curiosity part
i reacted that way oh
why did i react that way not why did i
react that way
that's not compassionate
i reacted that way
i felt this pain
i felt overwhelmed
i felt hatred
felt rage
i felt despair
huh
what is that about
so you have to have that curiosity
and you have to have the compassion
to look at yourself not through that
voice that tells you that you're
worthless
but to say
if i reacted that way there must be a
good reason for it
something in me
there's something happened to me that
made me react that way at some point
so to be so rather than
putting myself down
or thinking that if i have problems it
means i'm deficient
i have the curiosity to look into it and
the compassion to
not to judge yourself for it
and that both can be learned both the
curiosity and the compassion can be
learned
and
any good therapist
any any person you work with whether
they called compassion inquiry whether
they call it something else whatever
they work with those two attitudes will
be embedded in their approach
if they're going to be helpful to you
so conventional career ethic curiosity
i think is the key
and then are there tools so let's say
that somebody's doing the passionate
inquiry
they
really begin to understand what happened
to them and in fact maybe this is a
better question so let's say that you
had had the upbringing that you had all
the things you went through in hungary
in your infancy but no one ever told you
about it
what does somebody who they clearly are
suffering from some sort of trauma
but they they don't know what it is how
can they process through that
oh
yeah
that's not very difficult because it
shows up in the present
and i can easily i do that with people
all the time
so so they don't need the why they just
need to know that they are
reacting that way
well
it's not difficult to get them to see
um
that
what they think is your reaction to the
present is actually a reaction to the
past
this is without any recall
because
there's all kinds of memory and the body
carries memory even if it doesn't carry
your recall and a lot of things that
people that have happened to people
happened before they had conscious
recall
so uh
in my work i don't find it difficult to
drill down to
what is it that people are carrying in
the present you know and that
it's just a simple exercise that i do
with people uh
so that when i say but but to make it
long story short the past shows up in
the present all the time
and that's goes back to johnny cash it
all goes down in your mind
you think you're reacting to something
now
uh no you're not you know the uh there's
a wonderful um
italian writer who survived the
holocaust called primo levy who's just
the most profound
writer on the holocaust of them all and
he
went through auschwitz he survived
ended up committing suicide decades
later um
but he said
i'm just
looking
for the precise code here on my cell
phone
if i can find it i will
give it to you if you can bear with me
pre
i mean the the setup here i'm more than
happy to wait
okay i'm holding my breath
levy
okay here it is so he says
[Music]
anguish is known to everyone even
children
and everyone
knows that it is even blank and
undifferentiated
rarely does it carry a clearly written
label
that also contains its motivation
in other words people are beyond those
suffering
but we don't always know what it's about
it says and any label that it does carry
can be mendacious in other words we can
tell ourselves that we're suffering
because of this but it's not necessarily
true
he says one can believe this is the
heart of it one can believe or declare
oneself to be anguished for one reason
and be so for something totally
different
one can think that one is suffering at
facing the future and instead be
suffering because of one's past
one can think that one is suffering for
others out of pity out of compassion and
instead be suffering from one's own
reasons
and so on and so on
and
i just don't find it that difficult
to speak to somebody
and
show them that
their present suffering is actually a
memory of past suffering
so that you know so recall is helpful
and you know there's a ways to get at it
sometimes
if it's totally inaccessible people do
hypnosis sometimes
people do emdr sometimes people do
what's cmdr i've heard you mentioned
that before but i don't know
[Music]
eye movement desensitization
reprogramming it's a way of working with
conscious and unconscious memories um
there's psychedelic work that sometimes
i've seen people under the influence of
psychedelics recall things
um that are not available to conscious
memory usually
but
none of that is crucial
what is crucial is to make the
distinction
that what i'm experiencing now is a
resonance of the past
and i don't have to keep having that
same resonance
if i can um
reinterpret
the meaning that i gave to that past
experience
now without demonstrating it
live i can't say more about it except
again to say that
we don't have to worry about recalling
because the past shows up in a form of
physiological and emotional memory
every day in your life and particularly
when you're upset
so that
it's not that difficult to
to get at it
and usually what happens you see is
not so much that people don't remember
suffering no
it's not so much that people don't
remember what happened is that they
don't associate with suffering because
already when they were expressing it
they had to repress their emotions
so when you say a lot of people have
told me i had a happy childhood
uh i still had mental illness and
addiction later on but i had a heavy
childhood it takes me three minutes
of just a few questions turns out that
that childhood wasn't so happy at all
and it's not that they didn't remember
events is that they didn't associate it
with the pain because they already
suppressed the pain that's how they
survived it
so that's not difficult work
it's worth you do extraordinarily well
and i encourage everybody to follow you
where would be the easiest place to get
a hold of you is it books first is it
social media
well i don't personally post or read
life is too short um
uh
yeah there's my four books out there
there's a website dragomate.com
i have all kinds of events happening a
lot of
like for example in march i'm doing an
event with a california-based
organization called spirituality and
non-duality and i think it's called the
wisdom of trauma it'll be a four-day
online workshop very intense
last time there was about a thousand
people who took it probably will be that
many again
in a few weeks
that's a four day immersion into my work
it's not for the faint-hearted um
because it will take you deep
and it'll be difficult at times but um i
think it'll be liberating as well so
there's all kinds of stuff that i do
online it's all at the website at my
website there's my books and
if you don't spend money in books you
don't have to
for one reason or another
people have posted all kinds of stuff of
mine on youtube so lots of my talks on
youtube none of that cost anything any
money to
access no they have to sign up for
anything
so there's youtube there's my website
there my books
um perfect
lots of stuff out there
a lot of amazing stuff i've seen a
a whole lot of it and i can just say
it's absolutely incredible
uh gabor thank you so much for taking
the time man i have wanted to sit down
with you for a very long time so i'm
very grateful that you made the time
guys trust me when i say that this is
somebody who has a lot more to offer
than can be fit in two hours so uh by
all means check out the books look at
the other stuff that you can find you'll
be richly rewarded and speaking of being
richly rewarded if you haven't already
be sure to subscribe and until next time
my friends be legendary take care
[Music]
you